ABILITY BLOCK
Minor, General
You are completely unable to learn a certain class of Abilities, for some reason. This
may be Martial Abilities, or a more limited set
of the others. A profound inability to master
logic would rule out Artes Liberales,
Philosophiae, any Law, Medicine, and
Theology. Alternatively, you might be unable
to learn any languages other than your native
tongue. It must be possible for your character
to learn the abilities in question, but she need
have no intention of doing so. You may only
take this Flaw once.
AFFLICTED TONGUE
Minor, General
You have a speech impediment, such as a
lisp, stutter, or missing teeth. You suffer a –2 to
all rolls involving the voice. If you are a magus,
you must also roll an extra botch die when casting a spell using words.
AGE QUICKLY
Major, Supernatural
Probably due to a curse or a magical disaster, you age twice as fast as normal people. Your
effective age (which applies as if it were your
actual age when creating a Longevity Ritual, and
when making rolls on the Aging table) increases
two years for every year that passes, and you
make two aging rolls each year. There is no way
to halt or slow this other than Longevity Rituals.

AMBITIOUS
Major or Minor, Personality
You want to be the most successful or
powerful person in the world in some respect.
You will not be distracted into doing things
that do not contribute to your ambition, and
are very eager to do things that advance it.
ANIMAL COMPANION
Minor, Story
You are accompanied by a loyal, intelligent
(but mundane) animal that can obey simple commands. Your relationship with it is very close. If it
should die, you would be profoundly upset.
ARTHRITIS
Minor, General
Your joints are stiff and often painful, making almost any prolonged movement difficult.
You are at –3 to rolls involving repetitive movement, sustained over time. Occasionally, the
pain is so great that you are seriously disabled.
On any movement or combat botch, one of
your joints may “lock up,” making the limb effectively useless (–6 to all rolls involving it) until
you have a chance to rest it for a day or two.
AVARICIOUS
Major or Minor, Personality
You want money, lots of money. When
you have it, you do not spend it, but hoard it so
that you can count it. You can be avaricious
about physical things other than money, such
as books or raw vis. In this case, you do not use
the things you hoard, nor do you allow others
to use them.
BLACK SHEEP
Major, Story
You come from a prestigious family, but
you have somehow estranged yourself from
your relatives. They have nothing to do with
you, unless they wish to punish you somehow
or make use of you. Those who resent your
family’s power can take safe revenge by assaulting you. You begin the game with a bad
Reputation of your choice at level 2, among
those who respect your family.
BLACKMAIL
Minor, Story
You have information that some powerful
person would prefer kept hidden. You receive
payments or services in return for your silence,
and you may occasionally demand special
favors. Don’t push your luck — your victim
may decide it isn’t worth the cost, or silence
you permanently. This benefit has a yearly
value of about 50 silver pennies, possibly more
if you keep the pressure on. You should detail
and record the specifics of this arrangement.
BLATANT GIFT
Major, Hermetic
People immediately realize that there is
something strange about you, even if they do
not know you are a magus. Animals are
extremely disturbed, frightened, and possibly
enraged by your presence. You suffer a –6
penalty on all interaction rolls with normal
people and animals, and should see page 75 for
further discussion of this Flaw’s effects.
BLIND
Major, General
You have little or no sight. Using missile
weapons is futile, reading is impossible, and navigation in unknown territory is difficult to say
the least. Blind magi can detect targets by other
senses, and thus are less limited than people trying to use missile weapons. However, blind magi
cannot aim spells without magical aid.
BRANDED CRIMINAL
Minor, Social Status
As punishment for some crime in your
past, a mark has been burned into your cheek.
This adversely affects your ability to function
in society. You may not take the Wealthy
Virtue, but you may take Martial Abilities at
character creation. You may choose not to take
such abilities, if your crime was not violent.
BUSYBODY
Minor, Personality
You usually know everything that is going
on among your friends and acquaintances,
especially in private matters. You are always
interested in rumors and gossip, and are frequently able to extract personal secrets from
people. Among magi the language is more dignified, but the idea is the same: you keep tabs
on the Hermetic community (your covenant,
your House, and nearby covenants — at the
least). However, magi probably don’t have
much knowledge of what’s going on among the
lower class members of their covenant unless
they choose to apply this Flaw specifically to
such people at character creation.
CAREFREE
Minor, Personality
You are unshakably cheerful and happy in
all circumstances.
CARELESS SORCERER
Minor, Hermetic
You are slapdash in your use of magical
power, and must roll two more botch dice more
than normal when casting spells. Note that if
you would normally roll no botch dice, you
still roll none.
CHAOTIC MAGIC
Major, Hermetic
Your magic is very wild. When you cast a
spontaneous spell, you must specify a desired level
of effect. If you fall short of or exceed that target
by more than one level, the spell still works, but its
effects are beyond your control — the storyguide
decides the results. The level of effect includes any
levels you assign to Penetration.

CLOSE FAMILY TIES
Minor, Story
Your family is one of the most important
things in your life, and still supports and aids
you whenever possible, even at personal risk.
Family members do not hesitate to do you any
favor that is within their power, and can call on
their friends and neighbors to help you. It
works both ways, however; your family may
require help from you some day.
CLUMSY
Minor, General
You are not very graceful and tend to drop
things — you are at –3 in all related rolls.
Furthermore, roll an extra botch die when taking actions related to Dexterity. Roleplay your
clumsiness.
CLUMSY MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
You have trouble aiming your spells accurately. Any aiming roll (see page 86) is subject
to disastrous failure: an aiming roll of 0 is automatically a botch. (Aiming rolls do not count as
mystical rolls for the purposes of gaining
Warping Points.) You receive a –3 penalty to
any rolls involving Finesse.
COMPASSIONATE
Major or Minor, Personality
You help anyone who is wounded or in trouble. You cannot bear to see suffering in others,
although you happily drive yourself to exhaustion.
COMPULSION
Minor, Personality
You have an unfortunate urge that causes
you problems. Examples include drinking, sex,
perfection, bragging, or gambling.
CONTINENCE
Minor, Personality
You do not engage in sexual activity. This
may be due to a vow of celibacy, or simply personal choice.

CREATIVE BLOCK
Minor, Hermetic
You have problems creating new things in
the lab. You receive –3 on Lab Totals when you
invent new spells, craft magic items, and make
potions, unless you are working from a lab text.
If you experiment, roll twice as many dice on
the experimentation table.
CRIPPLED
Major, General
You either have no legs, or your legs are
completely useless. You may have lost them in
an accident or as a punishment. You cannot
walk, although you may drag yourself along the
ground, or push a trolley around with a stick.
CURSE OF VENUS
Major, Story
You are very attractive to people whom
you do not wish to attract. People you detest
keep getting crushes on you, and will not be
dissuaded. Furthermore, you tend to fall in love
with inappropriate people, and in inappropriate circumstances. Those people you are interested in tend to think you are vain and shallow.
CYCLIC MAGIC (NEGATIVE)
Minor, Hermetic
As with the Hermetic Virtue, your magic
is attuned to some cycle of nature and is less
potent at specific times. You have a –3 penalty
to all Lab Totals and Casting Totals during that
time. The length of time during which you are
at a disadvantage must be equal to the time
when there is no penalty.
DARK SECRET
Major, Story
You are haunted by something that would
lead to shame, rejection, and possibly revenge
if discovered. Hints about the secret continually arise, and there might be others who know it
and could betray you. This makes you avoid
certain places, dislike certain people, or fear
certain things.

COVENANT UPBRINGING
Minor, Personality
You were raised in a large, old covenant
that has little contact with the outside world. You
might have very strange religious beliefs, and you
certainly find medieval social and political structures very odd. You may take Latin and Order of
Hermes Lore at character creation. While Latin
cannot be your native language, you may speak a
language closely related to Latin that is spoken
only at your home covenant.
DEAF
Major, General
You cannot hear at all. You may be able to
speak, but you cannot understand spoken language, which makes communication difficult.
Magi with this flaw must roll an extra two botch
dice when casting spells with a spoken component, as they cannot hear what they are saying.
DEFICIENT FORM
Minor, Hermetic
Almost all totals (including Casting Totals
and Lab Totals, but excluding Magic Resistance)
to which a particular Form is added are halved.
The Form has its full value for the purposes of
studying it, and study totals are not halved.
DEFICIENT TECHNIQUE
Major, Hermetic
All totals, including Lab and Casting
totals, including a particular Technique are
halved. Study totals are not halved. Experience
points required are based on the actual value of
the Technique, before halving.
DELETERIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES
Minor, Hermetic
All your magic totals are halved under
certain uncommon circumstances. This can be
your state, such as sitting or wet, the target of
the magic, such as wild animals or iron, or the
place where you are casting the magic, such as
a city or high up a mountain.
DELUSION
Minor, Personality
You believe wholeheartedly in something
that just isn’t so. Examples include that you are a
magus (if you aren’t), that you are the Pope’s child,
or that your imaginary friend is real. This can
cause real problems for you and your associates.
DEPENDENT
Major, Story
You feel responsible for someone, and bound
to help if he is in trouble. This person may be a relative or friend, but should be relatively weak and
a non-player character. If your Dependent passes
beyond your ability to help, or becomes too powerful, you should substitute another Story Flaw.
Possibilities include taking the children of the old
Dependent as new Dependents, taking the killers
of the Dependent as Enemies, or taking the
Dependent as a True Friend.
DEPRESSED
Minor, Personality
You have a dark outlook on life, seeing little point in acting and taking no pleasure in
anything that happens.
DIABOLIC PAST
Major, Story
You were associated with diabolists, and
though you have escaped their evil ways, you
are still haunted by your upbringing and the
memory of acts best left unspoken. Perhaps

your parents were diabolists, although you
were not, or maybe you joined a cult but soon
repented and fled. Your former associates still
take an interest in your activities and whereabouts. Unfortunately. You may purchase the
Ability Infernal Lore, even if you are normally
not permitted to buy Arcane Abilities.
DIFFICULT LONGEVITY RITUAL
Major, Hermetic
Something in your magical nature makes
it difficult to create an effective Longevity
Ritual for you. Anyone (including yourself) creating a Longevity Ritual for you must halve
their Lab Total. You may create Longevity
Rituals for others without penalty.
DIFFICULT SPONTANEOUS MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
Spontaneous magic is always an effort for
you. You cannot cast spontaneous spells without
exerting yourself. However, when you do exert
yourself, you cast spells as any other magus.
This flaw may be combined with Weak
Spontaneous Magic to create a magus who cannot use spontaneous magic at all.

DISORIENTATING MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
After casting a spell, you must spend a
round doing nothing but recovering your mental faculties.
DRIVEN
Major or Minor, Personality
You have some goal which you are determined to bring about. This has to be the sort of
big goal that could shape an entire life, but if
you do accomplish it you will immediately turn
to a new project.
DUTYBOUND
Minor, Personality
You adhere to a restrictive code of conduct that forbids certain behavior, probably
including prohibitions against lying, killing
prisoners, stealing, and other occasionally useful actions. You follow this code out of guilt or
fear rather than high-flown moral standards,
and may spend more time justifying yourself
than keeping your conduct pure.

DISJOINTED MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
You cannot use previous knowledge to
help you with magic. You gain no benefit from
knowing a spell that is similar to one you are
learning or inventing, and you gain no
enchantment bonuses from Techniques and
Forms already invested in an item.

DWARF
Major, General
You are the size of a child. Your comfortable walking speed is two-thirds that of a normal person. Your Size is –2, so the severity of
wounds you take increases in three point increments rather than five point increments (see
page 171). You take a –1 penalty to each of
Strength and Stamina, which may reduce each
Characteristic as low as –6. You cannot take
this Flaw and Giant Blood, Large, or Small
Frame.

DIFFICULT UNDERLINGS
Major, Story
You may only take this Story Hook if
your character has, and will keep, underlings of
some sort or another. No matter how many
people you fire, or how carefully you vet new
candidates, your underlings always cause problems for you. The nature of the problems may
change, but you are repeatedly drawn into
dealing with the trouble they have caused. If
other people give the same underlings orders,
they have no problem. It’s not them, it’s you.

ENEMIES
Major, Story
Someone is causing trouble for you, such
as a local baron or bishop, a band of outlaws, or
a really nasty innkeeper. The enemy must be
powerful enough to endanger you — this is
best agreed on with the storyguide and the rest
of the troupe.

DISFIGURED
Minor, General
A visible disfigurement makes you ugly
and easy to recognize. Presence rolls that
involve good looks and gaining respect from
most people are at –3. You probably have a
cruel nickname that refers to your unfortunate
appearance. You might have a large, visible
burn scar, or an enlarged and deformed eye (an
“evil eye”), or even be albino.
ENFEEBLED
Major, General
You cannot exert yourself for longer than
a few seconds. Any need for rapid movement,
such as combat or a chase, leaves you helpless.
Long hikes are likewise beyond your capability.
You are unable to learn Martial Abilities or any
other skills involving physical exertion, since
you cannot train in them. If you are a magus,
you lose double the normal number of Fatigue
levels from casting spells, but you may carry
out laboratory activities as normal.
ENVIOUS
Major or Minor, Personality
You believe that everyone has it better
than you do, and that they don’t deserve their
good fortune, while you do. Thus, you try to
ruin their lives and take their goods for yourself. (This is not a good Flaw for a player character, as it is likely to lead to conflict with the
other players.)
FAERIE FRIEND
Minor, Story
You have an ally among the fay. How much
assistance you can get depends on the power of
the friend — a small faerie with (relatively) minor
powers can accompany you on a day to day basis.
Powerful faeries have other business, and may
only be available to answer questions and provide
guidance, not to accompany you around on your
adventures. Your ally is fully sentient, has its own
powers, and can speak when it chooses. You may
want to have another player act the part. While a
faerie companion can be a great boon, it can also
be a terrible burden. If it is nasty or mischievous,
it could cause trouble for you everywhere.
Characters with this Flaw can purchase the
Arcane Knowledge Faerie Lore, even if they are
normally restricted from purchasing it.
FAERIE UPBRINGING
Minor, Personality
Perhaps you were abandoned by your true
kin, and the faeries found you. Maybe your family actually lived in a faerie forest, or faeries took
you as a babe. Though you are now back in
human society, you feel at home with and have
an enhanced understanding of faeries, magic,
and other strange things. However, you find
human society, including religion, bizarre. You
may learn Faerie Lore at character generation.
FAVORS
Major, Story
You owe a boon to someone (or to a great
many people), and may be called upon to
return the favor at any time. The consequences
of ignoring such a request can range from mild
to deadly serious, at the storyguide’s discretion.
FEAR
Minor, Personality
You are scared of something that you are
likely to encounter fairly often. Its presence
makes you edgy and very uncomfortable.
FERAL UPBRINGING
Minor, General
You grew up in the wilderness, either
raised by wild animals or surviving on your

own. For much of your life you could not
speak, and knew nothing of human ways. Now
that you have joined human society (or the
covenant), you have learned to understand
some basic spoken phrases, but civilized life is
still a mystery you want little part of. You may
only choose beginning Abilities that you could
have learned in the wilds. In particular, you
may not start with a score in a Language. In
your first five years you gain 120 experience
points, which must be split between (Area)
Lore, Animal Handling, Athletics, Awareness,
Brawl, Hunt, Stealth, Survival, and Swim.
FEUD
Major, Story
Your family is involved in a feud. The
opposing family or families are roughly of
equivalent strength to your family and its allies.
You are liable to be ambushed or attacked by
opposing clansmen, and your family expects
you to join raids against your enemies.
FLAWED PARMA MAGICA
Minor, Hermetic
Your Parma Magica is defective and provides only half the normal Magic Resistance
against a certain Form. You may purchase this
Flaw more than once for different Forms.
FRAGILE CONSTITUTION
Minor, General
You are sickly and weak. You suffer a –3
penalty on all rolls to recover from wounds and
diseases.
FURY
Major, Story
A violent temper sometimes overwhelms
you, sending you into a destructive, uncontrollable rage. You are likely to be provoked by
some sort of specific event, such as being
insulted, being hurt, or hearing the Order of
Hermes disparaged. Roll 9+ on a stress die to
avoid flying into a rage when such an event
occurs, with another roll every round to try to
calm yourself should you fail the first. On a
botch, you try to kill everyone around you.
While enraged you get +3 to Damage, but –1
on all other scores and rolls.
GENEROUS
Major or Minor, Personality
You willingly give away your property to
anyone who expresses a desire for it, even if
they are not particularly deserving. If something is very important, you might not give it
to someone, but you will certainly share it.
GREATER MALEDICTION
Major, Supernatural
You have been cursed by some supernatural power, in a way that greatly hinders you.
The effects of the curse should be comparable
to those of other Major Flaws. Indeed, almost
any greater Flaw could be the result of a curse.
GREEDY
Major or Minor, Personality
You like to eat and drink, and do so to
excess whenever given the chance. You are
probably fat, but may not be if you rarely have
the chance to indulge.
HATRED
Major or Minor, Personality
You hate someone or some group so much
that hurting them dominates your life. The target of your hatred must not be someone you
could easily overcome.
HEDGE WIZARD
Minor, Hermetic
Because of your esoteric magic, other
magi distrust you, and more importantly, grant
you no respect. You start with a negative
Reputation within the Order of Hermes at level
3 as a hedge wizard, even though you are a
member of the Order.
HEIR
Minor, Story
You have little power or wealth now, but
you stand to inherit land and possibly money.
You need do nothing special to remain in your
position, but others may occasionally attempt
to remove you from the line of succession —
one way or another. When you finally win your
inheritance you gain its responsibilities as well,
so your freedom may be restricted.
HIGHER PURPOSE
Minor, Personality
Let others concern themselves with petty
matters, you have a nobler goal. This purpose
should be altruistic, like freeing an oppressed
people or bringing peace between the Order of
Hermes and society.
HUMBLE
Minor, Personality
You are humble, always willing to believe
that others are more skilled and better than
you. You do not necessarily underestimate your
own abilities, you just think others are better.
HUNCHBACK
Minor, General
You have a deformed body that gives you
a grotesque appearance and hinders your
movements. You are at –3 to all rolls involving
agility and balance. Communication rolls that
involve good looks are at –3.
INCOMPATIBLE ARTS
Minor, Hermetic
For some reason you are completely unable
to use two combinations of Techniques and
Forms, except for Vim and Corpus. For example,
you may be unable to use Intellego Herbam and
Intellego Animal. This Flaw may be taken
repeatedly with different combinations, but may
not be combined with a Deficiency.
INCOMPREHENSIBLE
Minor, General
You are almost completely unable to convey
the knowledge and understanding that you have.
Anyone trying to learn from you or from a book
you have written must halve their Study Total (or
Lab Total, if you are a magus and have written Lab
Texts on some spells or enchanted items). If you
are a magus teaching spells, halve all applicable
Lab Totals, both yours and the student’s.
INDISCREET
Major, Story
You are unable to keep a secret. You must
tell all to the first interested party you
meet in an effort to be helpful or to
demonstrate that you are in-the-know,
unless you make a 9+ Intelligence-based
stress roll. If you botch, you may have to
be physically restrained by your companions from answering any questions put to
you for the remainder of the encounter.

JUDGED UNFAIRLY
Minor, Personality
Somehow you come across the wrong
way to people, and they universally distrust
and underestimate you. You catch no one’s eye,
impress no one, and can get no one to take you
seriously. If you ever find an exceptional someone who sees you as you want to be seen, you
will cling to that person.
LAME
Minor, General
One of your legs is weakened, whether
since birth or through some accident. You
move slowly and clumsily. Your base speed is a
mere one mile per hour, and anyone can outrun
you. You suffer a –6 penalty on rolls involving
moving quickly or with agility, –3 on Dodge,
and –1 on other combat scores.
LECHEROUS
Major or Minor, Personality
You seek sexual contact with as many
people as possible. Note that you need not be
any good at seduction; skill here merely
changes the kinds of problems you encounter.
LESSER MALEDICTION
Minor, Supernatural
You have been cursed by some supernatural power. The effects of the curse should be
about as bad as other Minor General Flaws.

LIMITED MAGIC RESISTANCE
Minor, Hermetic
You are less able to resist magic than other
magi. You gain no bonus from one of your Form
scores to Magic Resistance rolls, though if you
are caught without your Parma Magica, you
retain a Magic Resistance of 0. You may take this
Flaw multiple times, for multiple Forms.
LOOSE MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
Your Study Total is halved whenever you
try to master spells.
LOST LOVE
Minor, Personality
You have lost your true love to death, distance, or marriage. You take little joy in life’s
pleasures and give up easily in the face of difficulty, since you’ve already lost the most important struggle. On those occasions when you forget yourself and have a good time, you inevitably
feel sorrow afterwards, thinking about how it
could have been if your love were with you.
LOW SELF-ESTEEM
Major, General
You have a deflated opinion of your own selfworth. You begin the game with no Confidence
Score, and never have any Confidence Points.
LYCANTHROPE
Major, Supernatural
You have been cursed to change form
into a dangerous predator (such as a wolf,
lynx, or bear) on nights of the full moon
(or similar, monthly astrological events).
No items or clothing transform between
shapes, and it takes one full round for the
full transformation to take effect. You aren’t
immune to normal weapons, and the curse
does not infect bite victims. The animal
may be detected as a cursed human with an
InAn or InCo spell.
You have the intelligence of an animal
while changed, react to all stimuli as an animal, and don’t retain any memory of actions
taken in animal form, save occasionally in
dreams. You may not even realize that you
are under this curse. You still recognize
both friends and enemies when changed.
Lycanthropes may transform into a
non-magical animal between Size –1 (wolf)
and Size +2 (bear). You have the normal
physical characteristics of the animal, except
that +3 is added to your Soak score (in animal form only). Furthermore, you are fully
healed of all wounds incurred in animal form
upon resuming human form (which happens
at dawn).

INFAMOUS
Minor, General
People know you well and curse you
in their prayers. You have a level 4 bad
Reputation, specifying the horrible deeds
that earned you such ill will.
INFAMOUS MASTER
Minor, Hermetic
Your master was a diabolist, bumbler,
fool, widely despised, or held in contempt
for some other reason. Most magi expect little better from you. Even if you’ve done
nothing wrong, you are treated as though
you don’t deserve to be a member of the
Order. You have a bad Reputation of the
appropriate type at level 3 among magi.
MAGIC ADDICTION
Major, Hermetic
You crave the rush of casting and holding
power over magic. Whenever you cast a spell,
you have a difficult time stopping yourself from
casting again and again until you drop from
exhaustion. Whenever you use a stress die in
spellcasting, you must, whether or not the spell
succeeds, make an Intelligence + Concentration
stress roll, against an Ease Factor of half the
level of the spell (or, if you botched, the level
you were attempting). If you fail, as your next
action you must either cast a Formulaic spell of
at least the same level as the previous spell, or
cast any spontaneous spell, expending Fatigue
and not reserving levels for Penetration. You
must roll again to control your addiction, based
on the level of the spell you just cast, but you
get a +3 bonus to the roll for every spell you
cast after the first. If you botch, you continue
casting spells until you fall unconscious.
MAGICAL AIR
Major, General
People and animals react to you as if you
had The Gift, but, at least as far as you know,
you have no magical abilities. You may not take
this Flaw if you actually do have The Gift; see
The Blatant Gift (page 51) instead.
MAGICAL ANIMAL COMPANION
Minor, Story
You are accompanied by a magical animal
that’s smart enough to follow your orders or to
disobey them on its own initiative. The smaller
and more innocuous the creature, the more
intelligent it is. A ferret or crow is as intelligent
as a human, a wolf is very cunning, and an animal the size of a horse is simply more intelligent than normal. The creature has a Magic
Might score of 10 – Size.
MEDDLER
Major or Minor, Personality
You want to fix other peoples’ lives:
arrange matches, teach children to sew “properly,” or tend the sick. You waste a lot of time
and energy on such endeavors, and people usually resent it.
MENTOR
Minor, Story
A person of some importance, wealth, or
wisdom has taken an interest in your life, and at
times provides you with minor material aid and
advice. However, at some point your mentor
will have a small favor or two to ask of you. He
might not necessarily like your relationship
with the covenant — perhaps you must keep it
a secret. The Mentor must be an NPC.

MISSING EAR
Minor, General
You cannot accurately locate the direction of
sounds, and suffer a penalty of –3 to hearing rolls.
MISSING EYE
Minor, General
You cannot judge close distances easily
and get –3 on Attack rolls for missiles and targeting rolls for spells. In melee combat you suffer –1 on Attack rolls because your field of
vision is limited. You also have a blind side
from which people can approach unseen. This
Flaw can be combined with Poor Eyesight
(below), but the penalties are cumulative.
MISSING HAND
Minor, General
Perhaps it was an accident or a punishment in your past that cost you one of your
hands. Climbing, combat, and other activities
normally requiring both hands are at a penalty
of –3 or greater.
MISTAKEN IDENTITY
Major, Story
Someone, who looks exactly like you and
whom you and your companions will most likely
never meet, lives near you, and is responsible for
an ongoing variety of violent, illegal, obscene, or
embarrassing acts. You often have to explain who
you are, and sometimes have to deal with the
consequences of the other person’s acts.
MONASTIC VOWS
Major, Story
You have taken vows of poverty, chastity,
and obedience to a religious superior. This covers
the vows taken by mendicant friars, as well as
those taken by monks and nuns strictly speaking.
MOTION SICKNESS
Minor, General
Riding a horse, in a cart, or sailing on a ship
makes you violently ill. When not traveling on
foot, you suffer double the fatigue loss on long
journeys specified on page 185, with a minimum
loss of two Fatigue levels. Violent jostling over a
period of a few hours could conceivably lead to
unconsciousness.
MUTE
Major, General
You cannot speak; perhaps your tongue
was cut out. You probably use rudimentary
hand gestures and grunts to communicate your
needs. You can still understand languages perfectly well, and may learn to read and write if
you have an appropriate Virtue. Note that magi
with this Flaw get a –10 penalty to all spellcasting, although this may be offset by taking
the Quiet Magic Virtue (page 48). A magus
with this Flaw can be assumed to be able to
make sounds, which are sufficient to allow normal use of the Voice Range.
NECESSARY CONDITION
Major, Hermetic
In order for your magic to work, you must
perform a specific action while casting any
spell. This should be something simple, such as
singing or spinning around three times. If you
cannot perform the action, you cannot cast
spells at all.
NO HANDS
Major, General
You have no hands. Any activity requiring
hands is impossible, and magi with this flaw
take a –5 penalty to all spellcasting. This may
be offset by taking the Subtle Magic Virtue.
NO SENSE OF DIRECTION
Minor, General
You are completely unable to follow
directions. North, south, east, and west have
no meaning to you, and you often confuse right
and left. You frequently get lost while traveling
unfamiliar paths by yourself, or with others following your lead, and often have to reason
your way home or to your destination from
first principles. This Flaw is incompatible with
the Well-Traveled Virtue.
NOCTURNAL
Minor, Personality
Your natural body rhythms try to keep
you sleeping until noon. You are at –1 on all
rolls made between dawn and midday.
Conversely, you have little difficulty staying up
at night. Though you enjoy no special benefits
in the dark, your companions may decide to
saddle you with night guard duty on a regular
basis to use your attributes to best effect.
NONCOMBATANT
Minor, Personality
You have no interest in combat, nor do you
have any ability with it. You might be unreasonably afraid of combat, or a complete pacifist, or
prone to freezing and doing nothing.
OATH OF FEALTY
Major, Story
You have sworn an oath of loyalty and
support to someone outside the covenant, and
sometimes they call on you to uphold your
vow. Magi are forbidden from taking Oaths of
Fealty by the Hermetic Code. Some don’t let
that stop them.
OBESE
Minor, General
You are large because of fat, not muscle.
You are at –1 to all rolls that involve moving
quickly or gracefully and at –3 to all Fatigue
rolls. You are not so large that your Size is
increased, and you may take this Flaw along
with the Virtues and Flaws that change your
Size.

OVERCONFIDENT
Major or Minor, Personality
You have a completely unshakable faith in
your own abilities. You believe that you will
always perform at, or slightly above, the peak
of your abilities, and cannot imagine failure. If
you actually botch, you come up with some
rationalization as to what “really” happened.

OBSESSED
Minor, Personality
You are fixated on some prized object,
action, or ideal. This interferes with your accomplishment of more immediate tasks. Examples
might include obsessive protection of magi to
the point that you attack those who insult them,
or obsessive neatness where you keep yourself
spotless and deride those who do not.
OFFENSIVE TO ANIMALS
Minor, Hermetic and General
Animals react to you as if you had The
Gift, although people still do not. You may not
take this Flaw and Magical Air. Characters with
The Gift may only take this Flaw if they have
the Gentle Gift, in which case only humans
react to them as if they didn’t have The Gift.
Animals with a Might score react in different
ways. In general, those that react negatively to
The Gift react negatively to you, while those
that react positively do not, unless you actually
have The Gift.
OPTIMISTIC
Major or Minor, Personality
You are convinced that everything will
turn out for the best. This is not overconfidence, as you accept that you might well fail.
Even if you do, however, you are sure that circumstances will mean that everything works to
your benefit.
OUTCAST
Minor, Social Status
You have the rough task of making it on
your own — normal society rejects you and
you are not attached to a covenant. Perhaps
you have a magical nature, a supernatural background, some disfigurement, or a tremendous
scandal in your past. You may not take the
Wealthy Virtue.

OVERSENSITIVE
Minor, Personality
Something that others find merely
unpleasant you consider intolerable. Examples
might include an oversensitivity to disrespect,
to slovenliness, or to impiety. If you are the violent type, you may start fights with those who
offend you.

OUTLAW
Major, Social Status
You have been outlawed, and must live by
your wits outside society. You may take Martial
Abilities at character generation, and have a
Reputation at level 2 for whatever got you outlawed.
OUTLAW LEADER
Minor, Social Status
You command a small group (three to six
persons) of outlaws. Your followers look up to
you and do what you tell them — within reason. However, you must occasionally stick up
for the group or one of its members, as well as
provide for them. You often have to deal with
challenges to your leadership in one form or
another. You are well known as an outlaw in the
local area, with a Reputation level of 3. You are
actively sought by the local lord, sheriff, or
other such official. You may take Martial
Abilities at character generation. Grogs may
not take this Flaw.
OUTSIDER
Major, Social Status
You belong to a group that is both readily identifiable and distrusted or disliked.
Examples include Saracens, Jews, and Moors.
You are shunned and often persecuted because
of this, and your life and freedom may occasionally be in peril. You have a bad Reputation
of level 1 to 3 (depending upon how easy it is
to identify you) among members of the dominant social group of your area. There is no way
for you to ever remove that stain, and you are
marked by it wherever you go.
PAINFUL MAGIC
Major, Hermetic
Casting spells causes you to suffer the
equivalent of one Fatigue level in pain for each
spell you cast. This reduces all your actions by
the appropriate Fatigue penalty, which is cumulative with any from actual fatigue or injuries
(though you do not suffer any physical damage
from pain). You recover these “pain levels” just
like Fatigue levels.
PALSIED HANDS
Minor, General
Your hands shake uncontrollably, which
makes casting spells or holding objects difficult. All rolls involving holding or wielding an
object are made at –2, including weapon skills.
Magi and others who rely on hand gestures to
work magic must roll an extra botch die when
casting a spell.
PESSIMISTIC
Minor, Personality
You always expect the worst. You may try
to enjoy yourself, but you are sure that anything
that can go wrong, will, and will pick on you.
PIOUS
Major or Minor, Personality
You are a fervent follower of your religion. You avoid the things it prohibits, and
enthusiastically do the things it commands.
PLAGUED BY SUPERNATURAL ENTITY
Major, Story
Some supernatural being interferes in
your life on a fairly regular basis. It may even
have your best interests at heart, but the result
is that you get dragged into stories. Suitable
examples would be a demon trying to corrupt
you, an angel trying to save you, a faerie playing games with you, or a ghost continuing the
agenda she had while alive.
POOR
Major, General
You are a poor member of your social
class. You must work three seasons per year in
order to make ends meet, and can afford only
the necessities of life, as measured by your status. This also means that you have one fewer
season available for any form of advancement
other than exposure, which is a major hindrance. You cannot take this Flaw if you are
supported by the covenant. In particular, this
Flaw is not available to magi.
POOR (CHARACTERISTIC)
Minor, General
You have an exceedingly bad
Characteristic — lower one which is already –3
or lower by one point. Describe what it is
about you that makes this obvious, such as a
feeble stature, hideous visage, or slack-jawed
stupidity. You may take this Flaw twice for a
single Characteristic, lowering it to –5, and
multiple times for different Characteristics.
POOR EYESIGHT
Minor, General
Bleary vision impedes your performance.
Rolls involving sight, including rolls to attack
and defend, are at –3. New environments are
disorienting and perhaps frightening for you.
This Flaw can be combined with Missing Eye
(above), but the penalties are cumulative.
POOR FORMULAIC MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
You are simply not very good at formulaic magic. Subtract five from every roll that you
make to cast formulaic spells. This does not
apply to Ritual spells.

POOR HEARING
Minor, General
Subtract 3 from rolls involving hearing.
Speech that is hard for others to understand
because of language, dialect, or accent is
almost impossible for you to follow. You often
pretend to be listening to people when in fact
you are not.
POOR MEMORY
Minor, Personality
You have a very hard time recalling one
type of thing, such as names, faces, or places.
POOR STUDENT
Minor, General
You are bad at learning new things.
Subtract three from all Advancement Totals
derived from teaching and books (that is, you
have no penalty to adventure experience, exposure, practice, or training), but do not reduce a
total below one. If you could learn something
without this Flaw, you still learn a bit.
PROHIBITION
Minor, Personality
You have had a Conditional Curse (also
known as a “Geas”) cast upon you and must
obey the restrictions of your prohibition or be
penalized by the curse. If you fail to adhere to
the restrictions, you will suffer the curse in full
force. The troupe must agree on both the
restriction, and the curse that strikes you if you
break it.
PROUD
Major or Minor, Personality
You believe that you are more important
than just about everybody, and expect the
appropriate respect. Magi may admit one or
two equals, but do not believe that they have
any superiors. Mundanes will admit social
superiors, but still believe themselves to be fundamentally better than, say, the king.
RECKLESS
Minor, Personality
You tend not to notice that situations are
threatening. You start with a Personality Trait
of Reckless +3, and can never have a positive
Personality Trait reflecting care or patience.
Whenever the storyguide deems it necessary
for you to check bravery or a similar
Personality Trait, make a roll against your
Reckless score instead. A success means you do
not realize your danger, and can act immediately without further checks.
RECLUSIVE
Minor, Personality
You do not like being disturbed or interrupted. You feel that an intrusion by another
upon your time is unnecessary at best, and an
insult at worst. You are very reluctant to be
dragged into public places, or group activities,
and generally complain when you must participate. Note that this is often a bad Flaw for a
player character, unless there is a good reason
why that character needs to stay out of play
most of the time (for example, he is played by
the alpha storyguide).
RESTRICTION
Major, Hermetic
You cannot cast spells at all under certain
uncommon conditions. These might refer to
your state, such as touching the earth directly
or having no beard, or to the target, such as
birds or glass, or to your location when you use
the magic, such as on a small boat or in a storm.
The Restriction also applies to effects generated by any enchanted items you create. Spells
cast remain in effect even if the Restriction
comes into play. Thus, if your Restriction is
that you must not have a beard, you cast a spell
with Year duration, and then grow a beard, the
spell does not fail.
RIGID MAGIC
Major, Hermetic
You cannot use vis when you cast spells.
Thus, you cannot increase your spell rolls or cast
Ritual magic. You can use vis in the laboratory.
SHELTERED UPBRINGING
Minor, Personality
You grew up completely separated from
society, knowing only your parents or mentor.
Recently you have been introduced to a wondrous new world of strangers, and you are overwhelmed. Depending on your personality, you
might react with contempt, fear, or wonder. You
are unable to function normally because you
cannot understand most human customs. You
may not take Bargain, Charm, Etiquette, Folk
Ken, Guile, Intrigue, or Leadership as beginning Abilities, but you may learn them in play.
SHORT ATTENTION SPAN
Minor, Personality
You have trouble concentrating. Keeping
watch, listening to complex orders, following
the plot of a story, or performing other such
tasks that require continued attention are usually not within your ability.
SHORT-LIVED MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
Your spells do not last as long as they
should. Spells that should last a year, last a
moon; those of a moon, only to the next sunrise or sundown; and those of a sun, merely
Diameter. Diameter, Concentration, Ring, and
Momentary spells are not affected.
SHORT-RANGED MAGIC
Major, Hermetic
Halve your Casting Totals whenever you
are not touching the target of the spell. Halve
your Lab Total when designing an effect or
spell that has a range greater than Touch.
SIMPLE-MINDED
Minor, Personality
You can only think about one thing at a
time — guarding the bridge, hunting for a
missing ring, or hiding in the trees for example.
You become easily confused unless others give
you very clear instructions. When unexpected
circumstances pop up, you find them difficult
to deal with.
SLOW CASTER
Minor, Hermetic
Your magic requires more time to prepare
and execute than that of other magi. Your formulaic spells take two rounds to cast; spontaneous spells also take two rounds unless you
fast-cast, in which case they take one round
casting time. Fast-cast mastered spells also take
the normal one-round time. Ritual spells are
performed as normal, since all magi must cast
them slowly and carefully.
SMALL FRAME
Minor, General
You are of a lighter-than-average build.
Your Size is reduced to –1. This means that the
severity of wounds you take increases in four
point increments, rather than five point. (See
page 171). You cannot take this Flaw and Giant
Blood, Large, or Dwarf.
SOCIAL HANDICAP
Minor, General
You have some trait that keeps you from
interacting easily with other people. This
impairs your dealings with most of society,
causing penalties of –3 on appropriate rolls.
Examples include morose temperament,
unworldliness, an unpleasant odor, or outspoken atheism.

SOFT-HEARTED
Minor, Personality
You cannot bear to witness suffering, and
causing it brings you sleepless nights. Even the
deaths of enemies are painful for you. You
avoid danger and try to keep your friends out
of it as well. Life and health mean so much that
you would rather give up important goals than
let another person risk combat. You are easily
moved by song and story.
STUDY REQUIREMENT
Major, Hermetic
You are unable to study magic from books
or vis alone. You must study in the presence of
the appropriate Art. For example, you need to sit
next to a brook or pond to study Aquam, or a
large fire to study Ignem. Growing things are
good for Creo, decaying ones good for Perdo.
As your knowledge grows, you need to work
with larger and larger quantities. See “Study
Bonus Virtue” on page 49 for a list of examples.
You may take Study Bonus and Study
Requirement.
SUPERNATURAL NUISANCE
Major, Story
Supernatural entities of a certain kind
interfere in your life in minor ways whenever
you are around them. This differs from Plagued
by Supernatural Entity in that the nuisances do
not have any long-term plans. This could represent a ghost that haunts you, or general enmity from faeries towards you.
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO DIVINE POWER
Minor, Hermetic
You are especially sensitive to the
Dominion and suffer twice the normal penalties (such as spellcasting modifiers and botch
rolls) to your magic when in a divine aura.
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO FAERIE POWER
Minor, Hermetic
You are especially susceptible to the fay
and their magic. Whenever you enter a faerie
area, you must make a Stamina roll equal to or
greater than its aura rating to avoid becoming
disoriented. In addition, your Magic Resistance
score, including Parma Magica, against faerie
magic is halved. If someone else uses their
Parma Magica to protect you, their resistance is
not affected and you benefit normally.
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO INFERNAL POWER
Minor, Hermetic
You are especially vulnerable to the dark
powers. Whenever you enter an area of infernal
influence, you must make a Stamina roll equal
to or greater than the aura rating or become ill
(–1 on all rolls). You get only half your normal
Magic Resistance score against infernal magic,
though if someone else’s Parma Magica is protecting you, it counts normally.
TAINTED WITH EVIL
Minor, General
An air of corruption surrounds you as a
result of something you, your parens, or your
ancestors did. Others naturally feel very ill at
ease around you, and can easily grow to hate
you. Gaining a positive Reputation is impossible. Magi do not react as strongly to this
attribute as normal people.
TEMPERATE
Minor, Personality
You do not over-indulge in any sensual
pleasures.
TORMENTING MASTER
Major, Story
Your master does not believe you have
successfully passed the apprentice’s gauntlet
(the test of becoming a magus). He periodically troubles you with political moves and indirect attacks. This Flaw is only applicable to
magi, although other characters could take an
analogous Story Hook.
TRUE LOVE
Major or Minor, Story
You have found the one person meant for
you in all of creation, and the bond between the
two of you cannot be sundered. Whenever you
are suffering, in danger, or dejected, the thought
of your love will give you strength to persevere.
In dire need, he may even come to rescue you.
More often, he will be in trouble and need rescuing. If any enchantment keeps you from your
true love’s side, the power of your devotion can
probably break it. Your love is higher than mortal magic, and no magic can make you hate your
love, or make you truly betray him. Your True
Love must be a non-player character. To have
another player character as your True Love, see
the True Love Virtue on page 50.
This Story Hook may be renamed “True
Friend” to cover characters with whom you are
very closely linked, but not in a romantic way.
If the True Love is significantly weaker
than the player character, and not able to provide useful assistance in most cases, this is a
Major Flaw. If the True Love is competent,
equal to or better than the player character,
then this is only a Minor Flaw. The True Love
may need rescuing occasionally, but more often
he will involve the player character in his plans.
UNPREDICTABLE MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
You always roll a stress die when using
magic, even if completely relaxed. If you choose
to cast a spontaneous spell without expending
fatigue, you must still roll to check for a botch,
although the roll does not add to your Casting
Total. Even if you have mastered a spell, you
must always roll at least one botch die.
UNSTRUCTURED CASTER
Major, Hermetic
You have never quite mastered the intricacies of spellcasting, and are unable to perform
formulaic magic without extreme effort. You
cast all formulaic spells as though they were ritual spells (including the need for vis), and you
may not learn ritual spells at all. You cast spontaneous spells normally.
VISIONS
Minor, Story, Supernatural
You often see images related to emotionally
or magically laden events. A vision might be of the
past, a possible future, or a distant occurrence, and
is often symbolic or confusing. Visions usually
come to you at quiet times or in places connected
with a powerful emotional or magical event, such
as the site of a patricide or diabolic sacrifice. Your
visions may warn you of dangers to come, or
involve you in matters you would otherwise avoid.
The visions come purely at the storyguide’s discretion, and reveal only what he
wants to reveal.
TWILIGHT PRONE
Major, Hermetic
You either enjoy or cannot help running
excessive amounts of magic through you when
you cast spells. You must roll to resist Twilight
on a single magical botch, rather than on a
double botch like most magi.
UNIMAGINATIVE LEARNER
Minor, Hermetic
You have trouble figuring things out for
yourself. Subtract three from rolls when you
study from raw vis.
VOW
Minor, Personality
You have sworn to do something difficult,
and breaking your vow is a serious matter.
Example vows include never raising a weapon,
never speaking, or living in poverty. If you do
fail to uphold your vow, you must perform
some kind of atonement, whether it be religious penance or coming to terms with your
failure in some other way. Furthermore, your
Confidence Score drops by one until you
atone. Depending on your vow, some people
may respect your dedication, giving you a good
Reputation of level 1 among those people.
WARPED MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
Your magic is accompanied by some
unpleasant side effect that always manifests
itself the same way, but with increasing intensity according to the level of the spell. Examples
include nearby items become hot or nearby
plant matter becomes shriveled and wilted.
This effect may cause trouble from time to
time, but is usually just annoying.
WASTER OF VIS
Major, Hermetic
When you use raw vis you waste one
quarter (rounded up) of the pawns you apply.
The lost raw vis does not apply to the magical
effect being enacted but does count toward the
total number of botch dice you must roll if you
roll a zero. You must use a third again as many
pawns as usual when casting a ritual spell, and
if you want to improve an Art score by studying raw vis, you must use a third again as many
pawns as usual. This Flaw applies to all occasions on which you use vis, including certamen,
laboratory work, and boosting penetration.
Wasted pawns count toward the maximum
number you can use at one time.
For example, if you would normally use 12
pawns, you use 16, and 4, one quarter of those you
use, are wasted. If you would normally need 10
pawns, you use 14, because 4 pawns are wasted.

WEAK CHARACTERISTICS
Minor, General
You have three fewer points to spend buying Characteristics than most characters. You
may take this Flaw twice, leaving you with only
one point to spend.

WEAK PARENS
Minor, Hermetic
Your parens was less powerful and a worse
teacher than normal. You gain 60 fewer experience points and 30 fewer spell levels from
apprenticeship, for a total of 180 experience
points and 90 levels of spells.

WEAK ENCHANTER
Minor, Hermetic
Your Gift is ill attuned to creating
enchanted devices. Halve your Lab Total
whenever you create or investigate an enchanted item. If you have a Deficiency that counts as
part of the Lab Total, apply the Deficiency first
and then halve the remaining total.
WEAK MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
Your magic is particularly bad at penetrating magic resistance. You halve the normal
Penetration Total for all spells, and only get
half the normal benefit when instilling
Penetration into an item. Note that you halve
the Penetration Total, after subtracting the
spell level and making any adjustments for the
use of Arcane Connections. You do not halve
the Casting Total and calculate Penetration
from that.

WEAK MAGIC RESISTANCE
Major, Hermetic
Any form of magic resistance you generate is much weaker under relatively common
circumstances which are fairly easy for an
opponent to utilize, such as when you are wet
or facing away from the caster of the spell. If
the conditions are met, do not subtract the
level of the effect from the casting total before
calculating Penetration. You would be well
advised to keep your weakness from being discovered by too many potential enemies.

WEAK SCHOLAR
Minor, Hermetic
You don’t understand what others teach
you very well. You get a –6 penalty to Lab
Totals when working from the Lab Texts of
others, including when re-inventing spells.
WEAK SPONTANEOUS MAGIC
Major, Hermetic
You may not exert yourself when casting
spontaneous magic, so you always divide your
Casting Total by five. In stressful conditions you
must still roll a stress die to see if you botch, but
the die roll does not add to your casting total.
You may still use ceremonial casting.
This Flaw may be combined with Difficult
Spontaneous Magic to create a magus who cannot cast spontaneous magic at all.
WEAKNESS
Minor, Personality
You have a soft spot for some sort of
object or person. In the face of this, all else is
unimportant: promises are forgotten, duties
neglected, and common sense cast to the
winds. Examples include poets and storytellers,
food, flattery, or a pretty face.
WEAK-WILLED
Minor, Personality
You look to others for guidance rather
than to yourself. Those who try to fool, intimidate, or manipulate you gain +3 to their rolls.
What you need more than anything else is to
find someone you can trust.
WEIRD MAGIC
Minor, Hermetic
Your control over magic is somewhat
loose, perhaps due to Twilight effects or idiosyncratic training. Roll one extra botch die
when you roll a zero on stressed spell casting
rolls, apart from your other botch dice. Botches
from this die should be strange or bizarre rather
than dangerous, and if the Weird Magic botch
occurs along with a regular botch, the results
could be truly spectacular.
WRATHFUL
Major or Minor, Personality
You are prone to anger over the smallest
issues, and your rage when you are thwarted in
something major is terrible to behold.

